THE EMPLOYMENT CODE ACT NO. 3 OF 2019

An Act to provide for the regulation of employment relationships in Zambia, to establish minimum employment standards, to provide for the resolution of employment disputes, and to provide for matters connected with or incidental to the foregoing.

PART I - PRELIMINARY

1. This Act may be cited as the Employment Code Act, 2019.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
"employee" means a person who works for another person under a contract of employment;
"employer" means a person who employs another person under a contract of employment;
"contract of employment" means an agreement, whether oral or in writing, express or implied, whereby one person agrees to employ another as an employee and that other person agrees to serve the employer as an employee;
"wages" means remuneration or earnings, however designated or calculated, capable of being expressed in terms of money and fixed by mutual agreement or by law, which are payable by virtue of a written or unwritten contract of employment to an employed person for work done or to be done or for services rendered or to be rendered.

PART II - MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS

3. (1) Every employee shall be entitled to—
(a) a written contract of employment;
(b) minimum wages as prescribed by the Minister;
(c) normal working hours not exceeding forty-eight hours per week;
(d) overtime pay for work done in excess of normal working hours;
(e) rest periods and breaks during working hours;
(f) weekly rest periods;
(g) annual leave with full pay;
(h) sick leave with full pay;
(i) maternity leave for female employees;
(j) paternity leave for male employees;
(k) protection from unfair dismissal;
(l) safe and healthy working conditions;
(m) protection from discrimination;
(n) freedom of association and collective bargaining.

(2) The Minister may, by statutory instrument, prescribe minimum wages for different categories of employees.

4. (1) Normal working hours shall not exceed—
(a) eight hours per day; or
(b) forty-eight hours per week.

(2) An employee who works in excess of normal working hours shall be entitled to overtime pay at the rate of one and a half times the normal hourly rate.

5. (1) Every employee shall be entitled to—
(a) a rest period of not less than one hour after five consecutive hours of work;
(b) a weekly rest period of not less than twenty-four consecutive hours;
(c) annual leave of not less than twenty-four working days with full pay.

(2) An employee who is required to work on a public holiday shall be entitled to double pay.

PART III - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT

6. (1) A contract of employment may be terminated—
(a) by mutual agreement;
(b) by the employer for a valid reason;
(c) by the employee with notice;
(d) by the death of the employee;
(e) by the expiration of a fixed-term contract.

(2) A valid reason for termination includes—
(a) misconduct;
(b) poor performance;
(c) redundancy;
(d) ill health;
(e) retirement.

7. (1) An employer shall not terminate the employment of an employee unfairly.

(2) An employee who alleges unfair dismissal may lodge a complaint with the Employment Rights Tribunal.

(3) The Employment Rights Tribunal may—
(a) order the reinstatement of the employee;
(b) order the payment of compensation;
(c) make any other order it considers just and equitable.

PART IV - EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS TRIBUNAL

8. (1) There is established the Employment Rights Tribunal.

(2) The Tribunal shall consist of—
(a) a chairperson who shall be a person qualified to be a judge of the High Court;
(b) two members representing employers;
(c) two members representing employees.

(3) The members of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the Minister.

9. The Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine—
(a) complaints of unfair dismissal;
(b) disputes relating to wages and conditions of employment;
(c) complaints of discrimination in employment;
(d) any other employment-related disputes.

10. (1) A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Tribunal may appeal to the High Court.

(2) An appeal shall be lodged within thirty days of the decision of the Tribunal.

PART V - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

11. (1) Employees have the right to form and join trade unions.

(2) Employers have the right to form and join employers' organizations.

(3) Trade unions and employers' organizations have the right to engage in collective bargaining.

12. (1) A collective agreement may be entered into between—
(a) a trade union and an employer;
(b) a trade union and an employers' organization.

(2) A collective agreement shall be binding on—
(a) the parties to the agreement;
(b) all employees who are members of the trade union;
(c) all employers who are members of the employers' organization.

PART VI - ENFORCEMENT

13. (1) The Minister may appoint labour officers to enforce the provisions of this Act.

(2) A labour officer may—
(a) enter any workplace to inspect working conditions;
(b) require the production of employment records;
(c) investigate complaints of violations of this Act;
(d) issue compliance orders.

14. Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or to both.

PART VII - MISCELLANEOUS

15. The Minister may make regulations for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act.

16. This Act shall come into operation on such date as the Minister may, by statutory instrument, appoint.

This Act regulates employment relationships in Zambia and covers minimum wage, working hours, leave entitlements, termination procedures, worker protection, and establishes the Employment Rights Tribunal for resolving employment disputes.
