CONSTITUTION OF ZAMBIA
SAMPLE EXCERPT FOR POCKET COUNSEL DEMONSTRATION

PART III: BILL OF RIGHTS

Article 11: Protection of right to life
(1) A person has a right to life.
(2) A person shall not be deprived of life intentionally, except in the execution of a sentence of a court following a conviction for a crime under the law of Zambia for which the penalty is death.

Article 12: Protection of right to personal liberty
(1) A person has a right to personal liberty.
(2) A person shall not be deprived of personal liberty except in the following cases and in accordance with procedures prescribed by law:
(a) in execution of the sentence or order of a court in respect of a criminal offence of which the person has been convicted;
(b) in execution of the order of a court punishing the person for contempt of court;
(c) for the purpose of bringing the person before a court in execution of the order of a court;

Article 13: Protection from slavery and forced labour
(1) A person has a right not to be held in slavery or servitude.
(2) A person has a right not to be required to perform forced labour.
(3) For the purposes of this Article, "forced labour" does not include:
(a) labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court;
(b) labour required of a member of a disciplined force as part of the duties of that member;

EMPLOYMENT CODE ACT
SAMPLE EXCERPT FOR POCKET COUNSEL DEMONSTRATION

PART II: CONTRACTS OF EMPLOYMENT

Section 10: Formation of contract of employment
(1) A contract of employment may be oral or in writing.
(2) Where a contract of employment is for a period exceeding three months, it shall be in writing.
(3) A written contract of employment shall specify:
(a) the name and address of the employer and employee;
(b) the date of commencement of employment;
(c) the remuneration and method of calculating the remuneration;
(d) the normal hours of work;

Section 11: Probationary period
(1) An employer may engage an employee on probation for a period not exceeding three months.
(2) During the probationary period, either party may terminate the contract of employment by giving seven days' notice.

Note: This is a simplified sample for demonstration purposes. 
The actual legal corpus will contain complete, official versions of Zambian legislation. 